
Rezwana Choudhury Bannya                                        [pic]

============================================================================
==

|PROFESSIONAL ABRIDGEMENT        |





      ➢ Professor & Chairperson of Department of Dance, Dhaka University
      ➢ Principal & Chairperson of Shurer Dhara Music School, Dhaka
    ➢ Team  Leader  of  a  project  named  Music  for  Development  (MfD)  :
      Integration of deprived children into society which is  an  initiative
      of Shurer Dhara.

|ACADEMIA                  |





    ➢ B.Music and M.Music from Visva-Bharati University Santiniketan
    ➢ PhD from Dhaka University

|AWARDS                    |





    ➢ 1987 - Jaye Jaye Din Award - Bangladesh
    ➢ 1994 - Bangladesh Film Journalists Association Award
    ➢ 1992 - Anandadhara Gold Medal - Bangladesh
    ➢ 2002 & 2003 – Ananda Sangeet Award from Ananda Bazar Group,India
    ➢ 2000-2010 – “Best singer award” from several Music
      Companies,Bangladesh
    ➢ 2008 -Life Time Achievement Award by Channel i Television
    ➢ 2012 -Bangabandhu Award by little Magazine in West Bengal
    ➢ 2013- Sangeet Sanman Award from Government of West Bengal
    ➢ 2014 – Rabindra Puroskar by Bangla Academy, Bangladesh
    ➢ 2015 - Life Time Achievement Award by BTV
    ➢ 2015 – Life time achievement award by TRAB (Television Reporters
      Association of Bangladesh)
    ➢ 2015 - Sri Chinmoy Culture-Light Award in USA
    ➢ 2016 -  Awarded the highest award of Bangladesh – Sadhinota Podok
    ➢ 2017- Firoza Begum Golden Award of Bangladesh
    ➢ 2017- Bangabhusan Award from Government of West Bengal
    ➢ 2017-  Sangeet Mahasanman Award from Government of West Bengal.
    ➢ 2019 - Awarded honorary Doctor of Arts degree from the Asian
      University of Women. Received award from Chancellor of Asian
      University for Women Mrs. Cherie Blair and Vice Chancellor, Professor
      Nirmala Rao, OBE, FAcSS
    ➢ 2021 - Ph.D from Dhaka University
    ➢ 2024- Padma Shri  Award 2024 from the Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt.
      of India.


|KEY ACCOLADES ACROSS CAREER PATH                |






  ✓ Conducted a 15-days workshop/lecture  demonstration   in  Department  of
    Music, Iceland University of Arts in early 2018.

  ✓  On  Tagore’s   150th   birth   anniversary   Shurer   Dhara   launched
    “Shrutigitabitan”, a complete musical version of “Gitabitan”, performed
    by almost  400  Bangladeshi  born  singers,  alive  and  deceased,  was
    launched on 29th December 2011 by Nobel Laureate “Amarta Sen” and Prime
    Minister “Sheikh Hasina”.

  ✓ Participated in various seminars and workshops  at  Toronto  University,
    Calcutta University, Rabindra Bharati University, several music  schools
    of Kolkata etc.  Conducted  workshop  on  Tagore’s  changing  styles  of
    Rabindra-Sangit at Toronto University in the year 2005.

  ✓ One of the  external  PhD  examiners  of  Rabindra  Bharati  University,
    India.

  ✓ In  2009  she  organized   an  orchestra  which  includes  singers  from
    Gandharva Loka,  Christchurch who performed at  the Songs  of  the  Soul
    concert.

  ✓ Performed alongwith her students  from  USA  &  Canada  at  World  Music
    Institute, Symphony Space, Broadway, New York in 2015.

  ✓ Hajar konthe Borshoboron are being organized since last  7  years  under
    her supervision.

  ✓ Also the member of different  committees  in  Rajshahi,  Chittagong  and
    Jagannath University, Bangladesh.

  ✓  Member  of  Bangladesh  Prime  Minister’s  team   to   inaugurate   the
    Bangladesh Bhavan in Shantiniketan in 2018.

Music concerts :

 ✓ Performed  as  National  Artiste  in  programs  organised  by  Bangladesh
   Embassies.
   In  Srilanka,Thailand, Singapore,  Abudhabi,  Office  of  the   Permanent
   representative in the United Nations. New York, Washington DC,   Toronto,
   Montreal, Ottawa, Birmingham,  Manchester,  Leads,  Brighton,  Edinburgh,
   Glasgow, and many other cities in UK.










 ✓ Performed also in Japan, Russia, France,  Germany,  Switzerland,  Belgium
   etc.

 ✓  Several  concerts  in  Delhi,  Mumbai,   Bangalore,   Kolkata,   Madras,
   Ahmedabad,  Jaipur,  Benaras,   Allahabad,   Guwahati,   Ranchi,   Patna,
   Jamshedpur, Shilchar, Jalpaiguri, Malda, Medinipur, Berhampur,  Durgapur,
   Asansol, Burdwan, Haldia and many other cities and towns in India.

ACTIVITIES IN INDIA

Great art has no boundaries, and a great artist is assuredly a treasure  for
the universal creative world..
      This  is  never   an   exaggeration  in  respect  of   the   legendary
artiste  like  Prof Dr. Rezwana  Choudhury  Bannya,the  great  exponent  and
practitioner of Tagore's song, who has truly  transcended  the  confines  of
country and region, culture and community to emerge as a highly acclaimed  n
revered singer not only in the Indian sub-continent,  but  also  around  the
whole world.
         * Since the early days of  her  youth,  Bannya  had  her  aesthetic
sensibilities nourished and nurtured in the red soil of  Shantiniketan,  the
undisputed abode of Rabindrik culture...
          *Winning the prestigious  and  highly  coveted  ICCR  scholarship,
Bannya joined Visva Bharati as  an  undergraduate  student  in  1975.  Since
then, there is no turning back. She completed her  B.  Music  and  M.  Music
from Visba Bharati with the remarkable success.

          *After a gap  of  few  years,  she  again  returned  to  her  dear
Shantiniketan and went  through  an  intense  personal  training  under  the
guidance of the celebrated singer Smt. Kanika Bandyopadhyay( Mohordi  ).They
shared an intimate bond of Guru Shishya tradition. Mohordi turned to be  the
mentor, the Guru in every aspects of  Bannya's  life  and  her  legacy,  her
gharana or the style of singing were deservedly carried forward by her  most
beloved disciple, Rezwana Choudhury Bannya.

         * Bannya started her musical career simultaneously both in  Kolkata
and Dhaka. She had more than 100 albums to her cerdit from the most  reputed
music houses like HMV, Prime Music, Biswas  Records  Shristi,  Alap,and  she
bagged the honour of being the "Best selling"  artiste  of  HMV  house  from
1999 to 2005.





       * Her musical evening show "Anek Diner Amar Je Gaan" telecast on  ETV
Bangla channel got  huge  popularity  during  2004-2005  with  a  record  of
winning the highest TRP for more than 150 episodes throughout a year.

        * She continued to  keep  her  audience  enthralled  and  mesmerized
through her countless stage appearances and solo  concerts  for  years...Her
live programmes are evidently crowd  pullers  with  the  organisers  (  Both
Govt. and Non govt) vouching that the shows leave no standing place  in  the
hall.

           * Her music institute "Shurer Dhara",  now a name in  the  domain
of Tagore's performing arts and culture, has two international  branches  in
USA and India that are regularly holding online  and  offline  classes  with
thousands of students.

        *As a dignitary, Bannya has  often  been  invited  by  the  heritage
academe of West Bengal like the University of Calcutta and Rabindra  Bharati
University to attend the panel discussions or present her research  work  on
Tagore. She has efficiently conducted a number  of  workshops  and  seminars
across the country.

       *  Coming  to  her  awards  and  accolades,  one  must  remember  the
prestigious "Ananda Sangeet Award", sponsored by the Ananda Bazar  group  in
2002 for her album "Mor Dorodiya" and in 2003 for  the  album  "Matir  Dak",
honouring her outstanding contribution in Rabindra Sangeet.

        * She was awarded with the "Sangeet Sanman"  in  2013   and  finally
the most celebrated and highest civilian award "Bangabhusan" in 2017 by  the
Govt. Of West Bengal.

         * She was the only Bangladeshi singer, most honourably  invited  to
perform by the then Prime Minister Mr. Manmohon Singh at the  150  th  Birth
Anniversary program of Tagore, venued at New Delhi in 2011.

           * She also had the honour of being the  solo  Bangladeshi  singer
to perform in the song "Vaishnav Jana to" to  commemorate  the  150th  Birth
Anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi.




         * She successfully playbacked in a number of films which  were  not
only a treat to the ears but also a treasure  to  be  preserved.  Her  cameo
appearance in the award - winning film "Sob Choritra Kalponik", directed  by
none other than late Rituparno Ghosh is undoubtedly  an  asset  for  Bengali
film industry.

          * As a distinguished alumni of ICCR, Bannya had  performed  widely
across India several times with her team of "Shurer Dhara".

         *  Doordarshan Kolkata has recorded  and  telecast  Bannya's  music
video set in Shantiniketan, that has immense archival value.

               The list of  her  achievements  and  honours,  especially  in
India, is yet to be completed and we hope, remains never- ending. India  has
been owning and adoring Bannya since the very first day,  she  had  set  her
foot as a student of Visva Bharati and will  always  admire  this  legendary
artiste in the days to come.

   OTHER FOREIGN CONCERTS

  ✓ Took part in South Asian Music Festival in Glasgow Scotland in 1987.


  ✓ Took part in Annual Asian Music Festival in Amsterdam,  Netherlands  in
    1994 as solo artist .


  ✓  Took  part  in  Doucheville  Radio  in  Bonn,  Germany  to   celebrate
    Beethoven international festival in 2002. The total broadcast was later
    published as an album in 2004.

  ✓ Participated  in a concert in NY St. Patric Church  Manhattan  with  10
    foreign  and Indian musicians.

  ✓ in 2009 18th July at Manhattan  St.  Patric  church  with  10  American
    musicians. The whole programme was recorded and telecast at channel  I.
    That  was  the  first  Bangladeshi  artist  to  perform  with  American
    musicians.

  ✓ Presented Tagore’s composition  in 2009  July  18.  The  programme  was
    recorded and showed in a TV channel..

  ✓ To celebrate 125th birth  anniversary  by  an  organisation  named  The
    Tagorians was invited and Performed  in  Queen  Elizabeth  hall,  Logan
    hall, in London as a part of  Tagore’s  Birth  Anniversary  along  with
    artists  all over the world.


  ✓ Invited  to perform in BBC television & radio to  welcome  Bengali  New
    century 1400  in London BBC Television in 1993.

  ✓ Also Performed in BBC Radio’s  Bangla  Service  to  celebrate its  50th
    year in 1991 simultaneously from Dhaka, Kolkata and London  along  with
    the other famous Artists.






SEMINERS FESTIVALS DIALOGUES

  ✓ Member of the Bangladeshi cultural team to participate in Asiad  82  in
    Delhi and other cities of India.

  ✓ Member of  the  Bangladesh  cultural  team  to  perform  in  Bangladesh
    festivals in India in 1988.

  ✓ Invited to take part in the documentary made  on  the  life  of  Kanika
    Banarjee as her most favourite disciple in 1990.

  ✓ Participated in three day long Tagore festival in  Delhi  IIC  in  2010
    organized  by  ICCR  and  Bangladesh  High  Commission  to  commemorate
    Tagore’s 150th  Birth anniversary.

  ✓ Participated in a  cultural  dialogue  at  Delhi,  India  International
    Centre jointly organised by Centre for policy dialogue Dhaka & ICCR  in
    2009.


  ✓ Attended a seminar at Kolkata university in 2010  and  presented  paper
    on SONGS Of GEETANJALI which was later published in university journal.

  ✓ Attended a three day seminar and conference  in  Toronto  organized  by
    the university of Toronto. Presentation of a  paper  THE  DIVERSITY  IN
    TAGORES MUSIC was later published in the university journal.

  ✓  Was  invited  as  a  guest  of  honour  for  the  opening  of  Bengali
    Department in University of Toronto Canada in 1997



  ✓  Conducted  a  workshop  at  Rabindra  Bharati  University  Kolkata  on
    Rendition  of  Tagore’s  music  2013  .Several  other  workshops   were
    organized by the university in continuation.

  ✓ Presented a lecture demonstration  on  TAGORE  :  CLAIMING  A  CULTURAL
    ICON  at Loyola Marymount University  in Los Angeles in 2014. Same year
    it was presented in Boston Indian Association Annual event.


  ✓  In  2011  participated  in  the   inaugural   program   for   Tagore’s
    150th Birth  anniversary  celebrations   jointly   organised   by   the
    government  of  Bangladesh  and  India  both  in  Delhi  and   Kolkata.
    Participated at  the  programme  in  presence  of  the  Prime  Minister
    Manmohan Singh and the Congress leader Sonia Gandhi and also in Kolkata
    organised by the Honourable Governor of West Bengal.


  ✓  Performed  in  Sangeet  Natak  Academy  and  also  several  times   by
    invitation of The Impressario performed in Delhi.

  ✓ By invitation from ICCR  as  the  leader  of  a  20  member  team  from
    Shurer Dhara group traveled and participated  in  concerts  at  several
    places like Lucknow, Delhi, Kolkata in 2015 and was highly appreciated.

  ✓ Took part in a seminar about Rabindranath Tagore in  Colombo  organised
    by the High Commission of Bangladesh in Colombo in 2014.

  ✓ Took part in the seminar and  presented  a  paper  “Tagore  claiming  a
    cultural  Icon”  which  was  written  &  published   in   ViswasBharati
    University journal legendary artist Late Kanika Bandopadhyay,  Suchitra
    Mitra, Feroza Begum inaugurated by the Government  of  West  Bengal  in
    1991.




































 CDS & Cassettes

Recorded more than 900 songs which were released from USA, Germany, India  &
Bangladesh:

Germany : Daucheville

U.S.A  : Biswas Record & Rhyme 

India    HMV/Saregama, CVS, Times  of  India,  Biswas  Record,  Alap,  Prime
Record, Asha Audio, Sagarika, Shristi, Raga etc
 
Bangladesh : Impress  Audio,  Bengal  Foundation,  Shruti  Gitabitan,  Radio
Bengal etc



Rezwana Choudhury (Bannya)
bannyacourier@live.com
+88 01713002040
+91  9831208005



