
[pic]



Rezwana Choudhury Bannya is not just a  well  trained  professional  singer,
she is an ascetic practitioner of Rabindra Sangeet. The  compassion  in  her
voice touches the essential solitude of the listener.  She  thinks  learning
Rabindra Sangeet is like learning to incorporate beauty  and  goodness  into
ones inner being.  Rabindra Sangeet is the foundation of what  she  believes
in life as Rabindranath’s songs are the reflection of his  entire  life  his
philosophy and his aesthetics.

As a student at Visva Bharati she was fortunate enough to study music  under
the close guidance of  such  legendary  gurus  as  Shailajaranjan  Majumder,
Santidev Ghosh,  Kanika  Bandopaddhaya,  Neelima  Sen,  Manju  Bandopadhyay,
Ashesh Bandopaddhay, Sudesh Bandopaddhay and  Gora  Sarbadhikary  .  It  was
Kanika who inspired Bannya to start of her  own  school  in  1992  to  teach
Rabindra Sangeet and spread the specific style of Tagore Music.

On   Tagore’s   150th    birth    anniversary    Shurer    Dhara    launched
“Shrutigitabitan”, a complete musical version of “Gitabitan”,  performed  by
almost 400 Bangladeshi born singers, alive and  deceased,  was  launched  on
29th December 2011  by  Nobel  Laureate  “Amarta  Sen”  and  Prime  Minister
“Sheikh Hasina”.

Born in  Rongpur,  Bannya  had  a  Bengali   middle  class  upbringing.  She
developed an awareness of music and became  attracted  to  it  from  a  very
early age. Her father, Mazher Khan, was a high  ranking  civil  servant  and
mother, Esmat Khan, a teacher - they  both  loved  Rabindranath.  Naturally,
the cultural environment in the family was very  much  influenced  by  their
love of everything that was Tagore (Rabindric). They gave her  the  nickname
of Labannya, the protagonist of Tagore’s  famous  novel,  Shesher  Kabita  -
hence, the affectionate diminutive, Bannya.  She  probably  would  not  have
taken up music as a vocation without  her  father’s  constant  encouragement
and enthusiastic support at every  step.  But  her  talent  as  a  potential
singer was first truly spotted by Abdul Ali, her  uncle,  from  whom  Bannya
had her first lesson in Rabindra-Sangeet.

When  child Bannya’s talent became evident, the  family  enrolled  her  into
Chhayanat, one of  the  few  pioneering  music  schools  of  the  then  East
Pakistan. There, she was taught by Sanjida  Khatun  and  Atiqul  Islam,  two
most renowned artisites of Rabindra-Sangeet in  the  country.  Bannya  quite
happily sang her way through school and college without  ever  contemplating
to become a professional singer.

In 1975, Bangladesh had been independent for  a  few  years,  and  a  closer
relationship had developed once again between  the  two  halves  of  Bengal.
Bannya won a scholarship to go to Santiniketan  to  study  music,  an  event
that changed the entire course of her  life.  She  did  not  know  then  why
Tagore himself had placed music so high in the curriculum  of  Santiniketan.
She was overwhelmed by the music in the atmosphere  of  the  ashram.  In  no
time she entered the spirit of the place. Or was it the other way round?

At  Santiniketan, Bannya was fortunate enough  to  study  music  under  such
legendary  gurus  as  Shailajaranjan  Majumdar,   Santidev   Ghose,   Kanika
Bandopaddhay, Neelima Sen,  Ashesh  Bandopaddhaye,  Sudesh    Bandopaddhaye,
Gora Sarbadhikary  and  Manju   Bandopddhay.  It  was  Kanika  Bandopaddhaye
(Mohor-di) who took the young apprentice under  her  loving  care,  nurtured
her talents and put her through the paces of the most rigorous  disciplines.
In 1981, Bannya took her Master’s degree in Fine Arts and returned  home  to
Dhaka.

Rabindra Sangeet, having suffered during the few years before  independence,
had already made a comeback and taken a central place in the  cultural  life
of Bangladesh. Bannya had no difficulty  joining  in:  she  became  a  music
teacher at Chhayanat  and  Sangeet Bhaban and  soon  joined  the  Government
College of Music in Dhaka.   She started to appear in  concerts  and  on  TV
and Radio programmes.

In 1985, she recorded her first audio cassette. Soon  the  others  followed.
With the easy availability of cassettes in  the  rural  commercial  centres,
her voice began to carry Tagore’s music to the remote parts of the  country.
Thus, the appeal of Rabindra-Sangeet, which was confined largely within  the
culture-conscious urban educated class, was taken once  again  back  to  the
country folks. The arts media wrote  rave  reviews  about  her  -   she  was
lauded as having brought ‘a breath of  fresh  air’  to  Rabindra-Sangeet  in
Bangladesh. Awards and other formal recognition began to  come her way,  and
Bannya, still in her early twenties, set out on a fantastic voyage  to  meet
her destiny as an artiste.

Bannya’s first performance outside the subcontinent was  in  1986  when  she
joined the Bangladesh troupe to take  part  in  Tagore’s  125th  Anniversary
celebrations in London. During the same trip, she also performed  at  UNESCO
and Musee  Guimet in Paris and gave  a  few  private  solo  performances  in
Britain and the Netherlands. She was already  popular  with  the  expatriate
Bengali communities in Europe: seeing her perform live on  stage,  her   new
audience wanted more. Since  then  Bannya  has  been  regularly  invited  to
perform in many countries of Europe, North America, the Middle and Far  East
and Australia  by various cultural groups, both private and  public.  Bannya
found new admirers of Rabindra-Sangeet far away from  its  natural  habitat:
the Bengalis living abroad discovered a new voice that revived  memories  of
home.

In 1991, Bannya gave up teaching and  went  back  to  Santiniketan  and  her
mentor, Kanika Bandopadhaye. She had come full circle. It was time to  break
new grounds, delve deeper into Rabindranath  and  his  music.  She  spent  a
whole year taking specialist courses  in  instrumental  music,  particularly
the use of Esraj in Rabindra-Sangeet under the guidance of Nirmal Nandi  and
Sunil Kabiraj. Returning to Santiniketan   made a profound  impact  on  her.
The serenity of the ashram renewed her spirits, added  a  new  dimension  to
her music. She became more aware of herself as a person. This was  also  the
period when  Bannya  came  even  closer  to  her  mentor,  Mohor-di  (Kanika
Bandopaddhaye), not only as her disciple but also as  a  constant  companion
and confidante.  Mohor-di  took Bannya along on concert tours in  India  and
directed the recording of her first cassettes  in  Calcutta.  A  significant
achievement for Bannya was to be chosen to sing in  MOHOR,  a  film  on  the
life and work of  Kanika  Bandopaddhaye,  made  by  the  renowned  cineaste,
Gautam Ghosh. In this film, Mohor-di had commented she  would  pass  on  the
legacy to her most accomplished students. It  is  evident  Bannya  is  among
the chosen few.

Bannya returned to Dhaka in 1992 but  this  time  with  the  confidence  and
maturity of an accomplished artiste. Inspired and encouraged by Mohordi  she
opened Shurer Dhara - a school for teaching Rabindra-Sangeet in  Dhaka.  The
school was established at Mohordi’s  instructions  to  spread  the  specific
style  (gharana) of Tagore’s music practised  by   Shailajaranjan  Majumdar,
followed by his disciple,  Kanika  Bandopadhaye  and   now  to  be   further
cascaded through her disciples like Bannya.

Bannya lives in Dhaka with her husband and her children are settled in  USA.
She often travels abroad to give  concerts  and  participates  in  seminars,
cultural events and workshops  at home and abroad in order  to  promote  the
universal appeal of Tagore’s philosophy and music.

Bannya is devoted to the pursuit of excellence  in  her  metier   and  still
follows arduous training routines herself. She has gained  the  respect  and
the recognition of both the establishment and the public and has beyond  any
doubt developed her own inimitable style within the disciplines of her  guru
parampara gharana.

To spread her musical journey throughout the world she has been  working  as
a guest professor in  Music   (Hindustani  Tagore  Music)  through  Erasmus+
Mobility Program. As a part of this mobility program last year  she  gave  a
lecture demonstration  in Department of Music, Iceland University  of  Arts.
She is one of the external Ph. D. examiners of Rabindra Bharati  University,
India. Furthermore she  is  also  the  member  of  different  committees  in
Rajshahi, Chittagong and Jagannath University, Bangladesh.

Rezwana Choudhury Bannya is now a professor and  Chairperson  of  Department
of Dance , Dhaka University. Recipients of many awards over the  past  years
both in Bangladesh and India, Bannya  receieved Rabindra Puroskar by  Bangla
Academy in 2014, The Independence Day Award 2016, Firoza Begum Golden  Award
2017, Bangabhusan Award  from  the  Govt.  of  West  Bengal  2017  and   the
prestigious Padma Shri Award  2024  from  the  Ministry  of  Home   Affairs,
 Govt. of  India.

            Glorious achievements of Rezwana Choudhury Bannya  ….

    ➢ 1987 - Jaye Jaye Din Award - Bangladesh
    ➢ 1994 - Bangladesh Film Journalists Association Award
    ➢ 1992 - Anandadhara Gold Medal - Bangladesh
    ➢ 2002 & 2003 – Ananda Sangeet Award from Ananda Bazar Group,India
    ➢ 2000-2010 – “Best singer award” from several Music
      Companies,Bangladesh
    ➢ 2008 -Life Time Achievement Award by Channel i Television
    ➢ 2012 -Bangabandhu Award by little Magazine in West Bengal
    ➢ 2013- Sangeet Sanman Award from Government of West Bengal
    ➢ 2014 – Rabindra Puroskar by Bangla Academy, Bangladesh
    ➢ 2015 - Life Time Achievement Award by BTV
    ➢ 2015 – Life time achievement award by TRAB (Television Reporters
      Association of Bangladesh)
    ➢ 2015 - Sri Chinmoy Culture-Light Award in USA
    ➢ 2016 -  Awarded the highest award of Bangladesh – Sadhinota Podok
    ➢ 2017- Firoza Begum Golden Award of Bangladesh
    ➢ 2017- Bangabhusan Award from Government of West Bengal
    ➢ 2019 -  Awarded honorary Doctor of Arts degree from the Asian
      University of Women – received the award from Chancellor of Asian
      University for Women Mrs. Cherie Blair and Vice Chancellor, Professor
      Nirmala Rao, OBE, FAcSS

    ➢ 2021: Ph. D  from  the  Dhaka  University.

    ➢ 2024-  Padma  Shri  Award  2024  from  the  Ministry  of  Home
      Affairs,  Govt. of  India.

Professional Abridgement

      ➢ Professor & Chairperson of Departmen  Dance, Dhaka University.
      ➢ Principal & Chairperson of Shurer Dhara Music School, Dhaka.
    ➢ Team  Leader  of  a  project named Music for Development (MfD) :
            Integration of  deprived  children  into  society  which  is  an
initiative of Shurer
            Dhara.

  Academia
    ➢ B.Music and M.Music from Visva-Bharati University, Santiniketan


